README.md, before:

# React Component Lifecycle

## Objectives

1. Describe the phases of the React component lifecycle
2. Explain the importance of different phases of the lifecycle

## Overview

React components have two sets of properties: **props** and **state**. Props are given to the component by it's
parent. You can think of props as an external influence that the component has no control over whereas a component's
state is internal to the component. A component's state can change in conjunction to the props changing or when the
user interacts with the component.

The React framework was designed to enable developers to create complex and highly reactive UIs. This enables the
components to quickly adapt to changes from user interactions or updates in the app. In order to enable this, React
components go through what we call a **component lifecycle**. This is broadly divided into three parts: **creation**,
**updating** and **deletion**.

This means that every single thing you see on websites written in React is actually a React component and/or a part of
one! For example, if you open a new chat window in a website written in React on, a ChatWindow component is **created**.
As you are interacting with it and sending messages to your friends - that's the **updating** part. And when you finally
close the window, the React component gets **deleted**.

It seems all pretty straightforward from the user's perspective, however as you'll soon find out, there's a lot of stuff
going on behind the scenes.

## Lifecycle hooks and rendering
In order to enable this quick reacting and updating, as a developer, you get access to certain built-in events in the 
React component lifecycle called **lifecycle hooks** or **lifecycle methods**. These are opportunities for you to change
how the component reacts or doesn't react to various changes in your app.

These methods are called *lifecycle* methods, because they are called at different times in the components lifecycle - just
before it's created, after it's created, when it's about to be deleted, when a user interaction has propted an internal
change etc.

The only required method for a React component to be valid is the `render()` method which describes what the HTML for the
component looks like. There are a whole host of optional methods you can use if you need more control over how the
component responds to change.

## Mounting
When the component is initially created, it gets "mounted" onto the DOM. It sounds more complicated than it is:
essentially the component figures out its initial state and renders its initial HTML onto the page. At the mounting
stage, there are two *lifecycle hooks* you can use: **componentWillMount** and **componentDidMount**. 

**componentWillMount** will get called just before `render()` so you can use it to change the initial state if you need
to, whereas **componentDidMount** will get called just after the `render()` method. You would use this method to set up
any long-running processes such as fetching and updating data.

## Updating
Whenever a component's state or props are changed, it gets re-rendered on the page. That's the beauty of React
components - they're quick to *react* to changes. A re-render could be triggered when a user interacts with the component,
or if new data (props or state) are passed in.

For example, going back to the chat window example, whenever you press "send" on a message, the ChatWindow component
gets re-rendered as it needs to display an extra message. Whenever a re-render is triggered, there is a whole host of
lifecycle hooks which get called. You can choose to use any of these to decide how your React component should respond
to changes.

**componentWillReceiveProps** is invoked when the props the parent is passing into the component have changed. You could
use this to change the component's state based on the new props.

**shouldComponentUpdate** is invoked just before the component is about to re-render. At this stage, you can compare the
old and new props and state and prevent unnecessary re-renders: if the change in state or props don't actually alter the
component that's being shown to the user, there is no point "repainting" it as it is an unnecessary drain on your website.

**componentWillUpdate** is called just after **shouldComponentUpdate** has finished and just before the new component gets
rendered. You would usually use this method to set up integrations with third party libraries.

**componentDidUpdate** is called just after the new component had been rendered. You will have access to the previous props
and state as well as the current ones, and you can use this method to update any third party libraries if they happen to
need an update due to the re-render.

## Unmounting
At the unmounting stage, the component gets deleted and cleared out of the page. The only lifecycle hook at this stage is
**componentWillUnmount**, which is called just before the component gets deleted. This is used to clear out any stuff set
up in **componentDidMount**.

For example, if you had a component that displays the weather data in your home town, you might have set it up to re-fetch
the updated weather information every 10 seconds in **componentDidMount**. When the component gets deleted, you wouldn't
want to continue doing this data-fetching, so you'd have to get rid of what was set up in **componentWillUnmount**.

## Summary
If you need a lifecycle hook, there's sute to be one for your every need!

### Mounting lifecycle methods
Called once on initial render:

| Method             | nextProps | nextState | can call this.setState | called when?               | used for                                                                                    |
|--------------------|:---------:|:---------:|:----------------------:|:--------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| **componentWillMount** |     no    |     no    |           yes          | once, just before mounting | setting initial state based on props                                                        |
| **componentDidMount**  |     no    |     no    |           no           | once, just after mounting  | setting up side effects (e.g. creating new DOM elements or setting up asynchronous functions |


### Updating lifecycle methods
Not called on initial render, but always called whenever a subsequent re-render is triggered:

|           Method          | nextProps | nextState | can call this.setState |                       called when?                      |                                     used for                                     |
|:-------------------------:|:---------:|:---------:|:----------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------:|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| **componentWillReceiveProps** |    yes    |     no    |           yes          |  many times, whenever component is receiving new props  |                     applying state changes based on new props                    |
|   **shouldComponentUpdate**   |    yes    |    yes    |           no           |    many times, whenever a re-render has been triggered    |    deciding based on new & old props & state whether a re-render should occur    |
|    **componentWillUpdate**    |    yes    |    yes    |           no           | many times, when new state and props are being received | prepare for the update, dispatch any actions or animations based on state change |
|     **componentDidUpdate**    |    yes*   |    yes*   |           yes          |    many times, just after the re-render has finished    | any DOM updates following a render (mostly interacting with 3rd party libraries) |

\* **componentDidUpdate** will actually receive `prevProps` and `prevState` as arguments, as the newly applied state and props can be accessed through `this.props` and `this.state`.


### Dismounting lifecycle method
Called only once, just before the component is removed form the DOM:

|        Method        | nextProps | nextState | can call this.setState |                     called when?                    |                         used for                        |
|:--------------------:|:---------:|:---------:|:----------------------:|:---------------------------------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------:|
| **componentWillUnmount** |     no    |     no    |           no           | once, just before component is removed form the DOM | destroying and side effects set up in componentDidMount |

## Resources

- [React: Component Specs and Lifecycle](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/component-specs.html)
- [Understanding the React Component Lifecycle](http://busypeoples.github.io/post/react-component-lifecycle/)

Commit message:

Added an Oak tree analogy

README.md, after:

# React Component Lifecycle

## Objectives

1. Describe the phases of the React component lifecycle
2. Explain the importance of different phases of the lifecycle

## Overview

React components have two sets of properties: **props** and **state**. Props are given to the component by it's
parent. You can think of props as an external influence that the component has no control over whereas a component's
state is internal to the component. A component's state can change in conjunction to the props changing or when the
user interacts with the component.

The React framework was designed to enable developers to create complex and highly reactive UIs. This enables the
components to quickly adapt to changes from user interactions or updates in the app. In order to enable this, React
components go through what we call a **component lifecycle**. This is broadly divided into three parts: **creation**,
**updating** and **deletion**.

This means that every single thing you see on websites written in React is actually a React component and/or a part of
one! For example, if you open a new chat window in a website written in React on, a ChatWindow component is **created**.
As you are interacting with it and sending messages to your friends - that's the **updating** part. And when you finally
close the window, the React component gets **deleted**.

It seems all pretty straightforward from the user's perspective, however as you'll soon find out, there's a lot of stuff
going on behind the scenes.

## Lifecycle hooks and rendering
In order to enable this quick reacting and updating, as a developer, you get access to certain built-in events in the 
React component lifecycle called **lifecycle hooks** or **lifecycle methods**. These are opportunities for you to change
how the component reacts or doesn't react to various changes in your app.

These methods are called *lifecycle* methods, because they are called at different times in the components lifecycle - just
before it's created, after it's created, when it's about to be deleted, when a user interaction has prompted an internal
change etc.

The only required method for a React component to be valid is the `render()` method which describes what the HTML for the
component looks like. There are a whole host of optional methods you can use if you need more control over how the
component responds to change.

## Mounting
When the component is initially created, it gets "mounted" onto the DOM. It sounds more complicated than it is:
essentially the component figures out its initial state and renders its initial HTML onto the page. At the mounting
stage, there are two *lifecycle hooks* you can use: **componentWillMount** and **componentDidMount**. 

**componentWillMount** will get called just before `render()` so you can use it to change the initial state if you need
to, whereas **componentDidMount** will get called just after the `render()` method. You would use this method to set up
any long-running processes such as fetching and updating data.

## Updating
Whenever a component's state or props are changed, it gets re-rendered on the page. That's the beauty of React
components - they're quick to *react* to changes. A re-render could be triggered when a user interacts with the component,
or if new data (props or state) are passed in.

For example, going back to the chat window example, whenever you press "send" on a message, the ChatWindow component
gets re-rendered as it needs to display an extra message. Whenever a re-render is triggered, there is a whole host of
lifecycle hooks which get called. You can choose to use any of these to decide how your React component should respond
to changes.

**componentWillReceiveProps** is invoked when the props the parent is passing into the component have changed. You could
use this to change the component's state based on the new props.

**shouldComponentUpdate** is invoked just before the component is about to re-render. At this stage, you can compare the
old and new props and state and prevent unnecessary re-renders: if the change in state or props don't actually alter the
component that's being shown to the user, there is no point "repainting" it as it is an unnecessary drain on your website.

**componentWillUpdate** is called just after **shouldComponentUpdate** has finished and just before the new component gets
rendered. You would usually use this method to set up integrations with third party libraries.

**componentDidUpdate** is called just after the new component had been rendered. You will have access to the previous props
and state as well as the current ones, and you can use this method to update any third party libraries if they happen to
need an update due to the re-render.

## Unmounting
At the unmounting stage, the component gets deleted and cleared out of the page. The only lifecycle hook at this stage is
**componentWillUnmount**, which is called just before the component gets deleted. This is used to clear out any stuff set
up in **componentDidMount**.

For example, if you had a component that displays the weather data in your home town, you might have set it up to re-fetch
the updated weather information every 10 seconds in **componentDidMount**. When the component gets deleted, you wouldn't
want to continue doing this data-fetching, so you'd have to get rid of what was set up in **componentWillUnmount**.

## Summary
Imagine a big old Oak tree. The Tree could be a parent component, each of its Branches is a child component of the Tree,
each of its leaves a child component of the Branch and so on. Each of the Leaves go though a very obvious lifecycle of
being created, changing based on state (changing colour based on the season, withering if there's not enough nutrition
being passed down from the parent Branch, changing into a leaf with a hole bitten out of it if a caterpillar munches on it), and finally falling down when it's autumn.

So as it seems, if you need a lifecycle hook, there's sure to be one for your every need!

### Mounting lifecycle methods
Called once on initial render:

| Method             | nextProps | nextState | can call this.setState | called when?               | used for                                                                                    |
|--------------------|:---------:|:---------:|:----------------------:|:--------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| **componentWillMount** |     no    |     no    |           yes          | once, just before mounting | setting initial state based on props                                                        |
| **componentDidMount**  |     no    |     no    |           no           | once, just after mounting  | setting up side effects (e.g. creating new DOM elements or setting up asynchronous functions |


### Updating lifecycle methods
Not called on initial render, but always called whenever a subsequent re-render is triggered:

|           Method          | nextProps | nextState | can call this.setState |                       called when?                      |                                     used for                                     |
|:-------------------------:|:---------:|:---------:|:----------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------:|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
| **componentWillReceiveProps** |    yes    |     no    |           yes          |  many times, whenever component is receiving new props  |                     applying state changes based on new props                    |
|   **shouldComponentUpdate**   |    yes    |    yes    |           no           |    many times, whenever a re-render has been triggered    |    deciding based on new & old props & state whether a re-render should occur    |
|    **componentWillUpdate**    |    yes    |    yes    |           no           | many times, when new state and props are being received | prepare for the update, dispatch any actions or animations based on state change |
|     **componentDidUpdate**    |    yes*   |    yes*   |           yes          |    many times, just after the re-render has finished    | any DOM updates following a render (mostly interacting with 3rd party libraries) |

\* **componentDidUpdate** will actually receive `prevProps` and `prevState` as arguments, as the newly applied state and props can be accessed through `this.props` and `this.state`.


### Dismounting lifecycle method
Called only once, just before the component is removed form the DOM:

|        Method        | nextProps | nextState | can call this.setState |                     called when?                    |                         used for                        |
|:--------------------:|:---------:|:---------:|:----------------------:|:---------------------------------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------------:|
| **componentWillUnmount** |     no    |     no    |           no           | once, just before component is removed form the DOM | destroying and side effects set up in componentDidMount |

## Resources

- [React: Component Specs and Lifecycle](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/component-specs.html)
- [Understanding the React Component Lifecycle](http://busypeoples.github.io/post/react-component-lifecycle/)
